general:
haddockify code
adapt language summary (C.1.1, A-2, C-3 - C-8)

checking legality of internal and external terms is missing

subtypes are treated like type synonyms

class constraints are not checked in function applications

class names are not considered for mapping (Morphism.hs)

exhaustive and overlapping patterns are not checked for several
program equations or case patterns. (Merge.hs?)



datatyoes:
sentences fo attributes comm, assoc, unit, definitions 
are not generated yet. Data types result in special data type
sentences that imply the usual equations.

The selector positions can not be reconstructed from the AltDefn
(Le.hs) entries, thus equations should be generated!

Maybe the whole morphism (or the typeIdMap) should be stored with
datatypes, because (illegal) renaming of other components to a
generated type will change the type (even if the generated types are
renamed as well!)



terms:
mutual recursive let-equations (and what not?) are not supported yet
(TypeCheck.hs)

Maybe TypeCheck should generate new type variables for unknown
variables (with type "MixfixType []") rather than MixAna
(extractBindings).

a wild card pattern (just "__" with lowest precedence?) is missing

as-patterns are only partially implemented

if-then-else is currently build in, but schould be user-definable.
Allow for "op if__then__else : ..." . 

Disallow "=" and "<=>" after "op" to avoid overloading with builtin
names (Builtin.hs) or check for the type when changing terms to
program equations (ProgEq.hs).

checking for a legal let-Pattern (a variable applied to arguments) for
executable terms (ProgEq.hs).

"__ __" has highest precedence and ":" has (strong) postfix precedence
(adapt language summary C.2.1)

shorter printing of terms

terms in sentences are not quantified over global variables 



misc:
hiding of sub- or supertypes is a problem, with respect to dependent
operations. (SymbolMapAnalysis.hs)

empty maps for id morphisms don't work yet



CASL:
Overload.hs should generated Applications for constants rather than
Var_decls

convert TERM to Mixfix_bracketed terms and use printText0 rather than
showTerm from ShowMixfix

assoc ops are partial and may not be found via the fun_map of
morphisms, but the morphism should also map this partial functions
correctly, since morphisms should be applicable to subsignatures.

Maybe funKind should be ignored as fun_map key for lookup. (Also the
FunKind value of the mapping seems to be redundant, as it could also
be looked up in the target signature.)

Maybe the translated type should be stored as value rather than only
the funKind.

id mappings should be represented by empty maps

Maybe in CASL.Morphism.compose the target(m1) only needs to be a
subsignature of the source(m2) 



Hatchet/Haskell:
conversion HsSyn and AHsSyn is stupid

AxiomBinds are not renamed 

PrintModuleInfo is entirely faked and unusable for showing a Haskell
theory that was directly read in (form a .het file and Haskell code in
curly braces.)



ToHaskell:
formulas are not translated to Hassle Axioms

overloaded names are not properly distinguished (Secd.het __+__)

free types with subtypes components get too few constructors (and
become disjoint types)



HetAna/Logic:
comparing symbol sets with (symbol-) equality may be a problem

legal_obj (Logic.hs) is currently unused 
signatures should be always legal by construction
